# Aluminium / Betonite

**[One of our WAPF researchers looked into the aluminum issue associated with bentonite and found that this form of aluminum is not bioavailable?that the issue is in "unbound" aluminum such as in cookware, drinking water, and antacids (see her comments below). We have also heard many healing stories associated with the intake of Pascalite clay (http://www.pascalite.com), a calcium bentonite. Do you have reason to believe that this should be avoided?]**

"Medical" bentonite does often have other
(toxic) stuff in it, but that wasn't my point. Its silica content is
an important issue, because of its ability to induce inflammatory
cytokines, causing systemic effects, but that wasn't my point,
either. Beginning around 1940, I heard the pitch of the aluminum
utensil salesmen, that metallic aluminum was instantly covered with
an insoluble layer of oxide, that made it perfectly safe to cook in.
By the time I was in high school and college, that commercial
concept had become part of the standard curriculum. I see the idea
of Unavailable Aluminum persists, though now it looks as though the
health food industry has taken over its perpetuation. Coffee isn't
nearly as acidic as the stomach, but percolating coffee in an
aluminum pot solubulizes very toxic quantities of aluminum, despite
the "protective" oxide layer, and despite the surface area which is
so much smaller than that of the microscopic particles in clay.
Since clay eating is usually considered to be an obsolete form of
pica suffered by starving or malnourished people, the toxicity of
bentonite hasn't been a big research topic for biologists, but the
principles of inorganic chemistry apply to the stomach and
intestine, as well as to geology and mineralogy. It does dissolve in
hydrochloric acid, and then there are various chelating compounds
produced by bacteria in the intestine, that help to solublize it.
But the aluminum toxicity of clay wasn't my main point, either--I
just picked two random Standard Process products, with bean juice
and clay, to explain why I don't pay any attention to anything that
their marketers might say. Advertising is a dangerous cultural toxin.