# Moles

I've always been very cautious about moles, since I think they have the potential to degenerate into metastatic cancer. Around 1978, I had been watching one on my belly, that had enlarged from an original nearly flat soft light brown mole, to a large, irregular, leathery black thing. A couple of doctors had urged me to have it removed. I happened to be experimenting with steroids, including DHEA, at the time. One night as I went to bed, I saw what looked like a maraschino cherry on my belly, with a black crumb on its top; the black thing brushed off, leaving a spot of blood on the red dome, and I realized that it was my mole. Over the next 3 days the red sphere gradually deflated, and what remained was the soft, flat light brown original mole. Every few years I have had suddenly emerging moles, of various sizes and colors. Each time I would apply some progesterone or DHEA dissolved in vitamin E to the surrounding skin. If I applied it to just one side, there would be an emigration of cells on the other side, like a moving shadow of the mole, and the mole would lose volume and become lighter in color. When I had been in Florida and stopped using thyroid because of the heat and humidity, a 2 centimeter diameter mole (jumbo black olive-like) grew in front of my ear during 2 or 3 weeks. A soon as I returned to Oregon I started using thyroid, and the mole immediately began shrinking and fading. About two weeks later, the pale remnant on a dry stalk fell off, without leaving a scar.

Since then I have generally recommended just becoming slightly hyperthyroid, if a person is generally in good health (with enough cholesterol for conversion to the hormones), and other people have had similar experiences with very quickly shrinking moles.
